docs/4.md, before:

# Week 5-6: Storage Layer

> Define the Storage trait. Implement MemoryStorage and FileStorage for 8KB page I/O.

# This Week I Learned

## Storage Trait: Page I/O Interface

Implemented the `Storage` trait as the foundation for page-based I/O operations:

```rust
pub trait Storage: Send + Sync {
    async fn read_page(&self, page_id: PageId, buf: &mut [u8]) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
    async fn write_page(&self, page_id: PageId, buf: &[u8]) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
    async fn allocate_page(&self) -> Result<PageId, StorageError>;
    async fn page_count(&self) -> usize;
    async fn sync_all(&self) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
}
```

**Key Characteristics:**

- **Send + Sync**: Thread-safe for concurrent access from multiple async tasks. The Buffer Pool Manager (Week 7-8) will use this trait from multiple connections.
- **Caller-owned buffers**: Storage doesn't allocate memory - the caller provides `&mut [u8]` for reads and `&[u8]` for writes. All buffers must be exactly `PAGE_SIZE` (8KB).
- **No caching**: This layer performs raw I/O only. Caching is the Buffer Pool Manager's responsibility.

## PageId and PAGE_SIZE

- **PAGE_SIZE**: 8192 bytes (8KB), aligned with PostgreSQL standard and OS page sizes for efficient I/O.
- **PageId**: Simple `u64` wrapper that uniquely identifies a page. Provides `byte_offset()` method to calculate file position (`page_num * 8192`).

Notice that we use 8KB (8192 bytes) fixed-size pages. This is because...

- Matches PostgreSQL's default
- Aligns with common OS page sizes (4KB multiple)

## PageData: Page-Aligned Memory Allocation

Implemented `PageData` for low-level page-aligned memory management:

- **4KB alignment**: Uses `std::alloc` to allocate 8KB blocks aligned to 4KB boundaries (typical OS page size).
- **Zero-initialized**: New pages are zeroed on allocation for safety.
- **Send + Sync**: Safe to share across threads (used inside `Mutex<Vec<PageData>>` in MemoryStorage).

**Why page alignment?** Aligning to OS page boundaries provides better cache efficiency and compatibility with future Direct I/O features.

## Why Async Rust for Storage?

RDBMS implementations face a fundamental concurrency challenge: handling multiple client connections while managing shared resources (buffer pool, locks, disk I/O). There are several established approaches:

| Concurrency Model          | Examples                   | Strengths                                                       | Weaknesses                                                  |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Process-per-connection** | PostgreSQL (traditional)   | Full isolation, crash safety                                    | High memory overhead, slow context switching                |
| **Thread-per-connection**  | MySQL (traditional)        | Lighter than processes, shared memory                           | Doesn't scale with many connections, context switching cost |
| **Thread pool**            | Modern PostgreSQL, MariaDB | Bounded resource usage, better scalability                      | Complex work stealing, still limited by thread count        |
| **Async/Event-driven**     | ScyllaDB, Redis            | Handle many connections with few threads, efficient I/O waiting | Complex async programming, harder debugging                 |

Our approach corresponds to the **Async/Event-driven** model, but leverages Rust's safety guarantees and tokio's ecosystem:

1. **Compile-time `Send + Sync` checking**: The compiler prevents holding non-Send values (e.g., `Rc<T>`) across `.await` points. This is enforced at compile time, unlike runtime checks in Go or dynamic languages.
2. **Strongly-typed futures**: `Future<Output = Result<T, E>>` encodes return types in the type system. C-based async systems (libuv callbacks) often use void pointers; Rust futures are fully type-checked.
3. **Integrated ecosystem**: `tokio::fs::File`, `tokio::net::TcpListener`, and async traits work together without adapters. No bridging layer needed between different async primitives.

# Looking Forward

## Buffer Pool Manager Integration

The `Storage` trait is designed for integration with the Buffer Pool Manager (Week 7-8).

```
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│ Buffer Pool Manager         │  ← Week 7-8
│ - fetch_page(PageId)        │
│ - unpin_page(PageId)        │
│ - LRU eviction              │
│ - Arc<RwLock<Page>>         │
└───────────┬─────────────────┘
            │ read_page / write_page
            │ (on cache miss / eviction)
            v
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│ Storage Trait               │  ← Week 5-6 (this)
│ - No caching                │
│ - Raw 8KB I/O               │
└───────────┬─────────────────┘
            v
      MemoryStorage / FileStorage
```

- **Week 7-8: Buffer Pool Manager** will:
  - Call `storage.read_page()` on cache miss
  - Call `storage.write_page()` when evicting dirty pages
  - Maintain page-level locks (`Arc<RwLock<Page>>`) for concurrency control
  - Implement LRU eviction policy
- **Week 9: Slotted Page Structure** will use `Storage` (via BPM) to persist variable-length records within 8KB pages.
- **Week 21: Write-Ahead Log (WAL)** relies on `sync_all()` to ensure durability: logs must be flushed to disk before data pages.

## Production Readiness Gaps

The current implementation prioritizes learning and clarity. For production use, consider:

- **Graceful shutdown**: Flush all dirty pages and sync before exit
- **Corruption recovery**: Checksum validation (e.g., CRC32) for page integrity
- **I/O error handling**: Retry logic for transient failures
- **Resource limits**: Maximum file size, memory limits
- **Multiple files**: Support for tablespaces, indexes in separate files
- **Direct I/O**: Bypass OS page cache for more control (e.g., `O_DIRECT` on Linux)
- **Concurrent file handles**: One handle per thread for parallel I/O (pread/pwrite)
- **Monitoring**: I/O metrics (read/write latency, throughput, cache hit rate)

Commit message:

docs: clarify PostgreSQL references as learning-focused choices
Rephrase documentation and comments throughout the codebase to make
clear that PostgreSQL's designs (page size, MVCC, type OIDs, etc.)
are intentionally used for educational purposes, not because we're
claiming compatibility. This distinction helps readers understand
the project's learning-first philosophy while still acknowledging
the reference implementation we're studying.

docs/4.md, after:

# Week 5-6: Storage Layer

> Define the Storage trait. Implement MemoryStorage and FileStorage for 8KB page I/O.

# This Week I Learned

## Storage Trait: Page I/O Interface

Implemented the `Storage` trait as the foundation for page-based I/O operations:

```rust
pub trait Storage: Send + Sync {
    async fn read_page(&self, page_id: PageId, buf: &mut [u8]) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
    async fn write_page(&self, page_id: PageId, buf: &[u8]) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
    async fn allocate_page(&self) -> Result<PageId, StorageError>;
    async fn page_count(&self) -> usize;
    async fn sync_all(&self) -> Result<(), StorageError>;
}
```

**Key Characteristics:**

- **Send + Sync**: Thread-safe for concurrent access from multiple async tasks. The Buffer Pool Manager (Week 7-8) will use this trait from multiple connections.
- **Caller-owned buffers**: Storage doesn't allocate memory - the caller provides `&mut [u8]` for reads and `&[u8]` for writes. All buffers must be exactly `PAGE_SIZE` (8KB).
- **No caching**: This layer performs raw I/O only. Caching is the Buffer Pool Manager's responsibility.

## PageId and PAGE_SIZE

- **PAGE_SIZE**: 8192 bytes (8KB), aligned with OS page sizes. Intentionally using the same page size as PostgreSQL for learning.
- **PageId**: Simple `u64` wrapper that uniquely identifies a page. Provides `byte_offset()` method to calculate file position (`page_num * 8192`).

Notice that we use 8KB (8192 bytes) fixed-size pages. This is because...

- Uses the same page size as PostgreSQL for learning purposes
- Aligns with common OS page sizes (4KB multiple)

## PageData: Page-Aligned Memory Allocation

Implemented `PageData` for low-level page-aligned memory management:

- **4KB alignment**: Uses `std::alloc` to allocate 8KB blocks aligned to 4KB boundaries (typical OS page size).
- **Zero-initialized**: New pages are zeroed on allocation for safety.
- **Send + Sync**: Safe to share across threads (used inside `Mutex<Vec<PageData>>` in MemoryStorage).

**Why page alignment?** Aligning to OS page boundaries provides better cache efficiency and compatibility with future Direct I/O features.

## Why Async Rust for Storage?

RDBMS implementations face a fundamental concurrency challenge: handling multiple client connections while managing shared resources (buffer pool, locks, disk I/O). There are several established approaches:

| Concurrency Model          | Examples                   | Strengths                                                       | Weaknesses                                                  |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Process-per-connection** | PostgreSQL (traditional)   | Full isolation, crash safety                                    | High memory overhead, slow context switching                |
| **Thread-per-connection**  | MySQL (traditional)        | Lighter than processes, shared memory                           | Doesn't scale with many connections, context switching cost |
| **Thread pool**            | Modern PostgreSQL, MariaDB | Bounded resource usage, better scalability                      | Complex work stealing, still limited by thread count        |
| **Async/Event-driven**     | ScyllaDB, Redis            | Handle many connections with few threads, efficient I/O waiting | Complex async programming, harder debugging                 |

Our approach corresponds to the **Async/Event-driven** model, but leverages Rust's safety guarantees and tokio's ecosystem:

1. **Compile-time `Send + Sync` checking**: The compiler prevents holding non-Send values (e.g., `Rc<T>`) across `.await` points. This is enforced at compile time, unlike runtime checks in Go or dynamic languages.
2. **Strongly-typed futures**: `Future<Output = Result<T, E>>` encodes return types in the type system. C-based async systems (libuv callbacks) often use void pointers; Rust futures are fully type-checked.
3. **Integrated ecosystem**: `tokio::fs::File`, `tokio::net::TcpListener`, and async traits work together without adapters. No bridging layer needed between different async primitives.

# Looking Forward

## Buffer Pool Manager Integration

The `Storage` trait is designed for integration with the Buffer Pool Manager (Week 7-8).

```
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│ Buffer Pool Manager         │  ← Week 7-8
│ - fetch_page(PageId)        │
│ - unpin_page(PageId)        │
│ - LRU eviction              │
│ - Arc<RwLock<Page>>         │
└───────────┬─────────────────┘
            │ read_page / write_page
            │ (on cache miss / eviction)
            v
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│ Storage Trait               │  ← Week 5-6 (this)
│ - No caching                │
│ - Raw 8KB I/O               │
└───────────┬─────────────────┘
            v
      MemoryStorage / FileStorage
```

- **Week 7-8: Buffer Pool Manager** will:
  - Call `storage.read_page()` on cache miss
  - Call `storage.write_page()` when evicting dirty pages
  - Maintain page-level locks (`Arc<RwLock<Page>>`) for concurrency control
  - Implement LRU eviction policy
- **Week 9: Slotted Page Structure** will use `Storage` (via BPM) to persist variable-length records within 8KB pages.
- **Week 21: Write-Ahead Log (WAL)** relies on `sync_all()` to ensure durability: logs must be flushed to disk before data pages.

## Production Readiness Gaps

The current implementation prioritizes learning and clarity. For production use, consider:

- **Graceful shutdown**: Flush all dirty pages and sync before exit
- **Corruption recovery**: Checksum validation (e.g., CRC32) for page integrity
- **I/O error handling**: Retry logic for transient failures
- **Resource limits**: Maximum file size, memory limits
- **Multiple files**: Support for tablespaces, indexes in separate files
- **Direct I/O**: Bypass OS page cache for more control (e.g., `O_DIRECT` on Linux)
- **Concurrent file handles**: One handle per thread for parallel I/O (pread/pwrite)
- **Monitoring**: I/O metrics (read/write latency, throughput, cache hit rate)
